RPi’s Colocation Service in France : work in progress !Inspired by the French saying “We don’t have oil, but we have ideas…”, a French start-up decided to provide RPi’s in a professional hosting environment. Transform small electronic maps into real dedicated servers : crazy challenge ? A short detour to the French mountains…General OverviewDynamic team made up of two talented individuals who are passionate about IT Technology, NanoXion is a young start-up specialising in hosting solutions in France, located in Tarbes (South West). The company provides all kinds of high availability professional hosting solutions, server administration, maintenance and server housing service in datacenter.Why the choice of RPi’s hosting solution ?More and more companies are seeking flexible and better advanced evolutionary methods to manage efficiently their IT infrastructure. However, the offer is often not properly dimensioned to perform the demand, especially for the small and very small businesses.Indeed IT Technologies should include another aspect in their strategy and include an environment friendly approach. The current trend is towards a better adapted IT equipment to improve the global resource efficiency. IT management must now either fully participate to a "green" approach or risk becoming a weak link in eco-responsibility chain of the company. Moreover, new emerging computer nanotechnologies call for the interest of a greater audience, creating a new kind of resources to host.Using these new generation aims at modernizing this business field. That's the reason why NanoXion is planning to launch its own colocation service with "NX-BOX", drawing on Raspberry Pi technology for example.Our VisionThis new hosting solution allows providing an efficient, dedicated and unexpensive solution, participating on the basis of sustainable development principles thanks to their energy savings. First of all, we want to stimulate digital development, by offering everyone a secure environment to develop and implement groundbreaking belongings in this digital world.We also believe that these compact and energy efficient devices can play a very interesting role in a professional hosting environment.An interesting environment…These products offer multiple use performances in our own server infrastructure : manager, tasks automation, monitoring... Their performance is great : environment friendly thanks to the energy savings, tiny with his compact size and strong to perform several specific applications.In short, it works and rocks !We also observed a strong enthusiasm around this product, which can impact society itself. A lot of communities use RPi to develop and implement cool stuff. For four months, we have been performing a complete and rackable solution to equip our Rack-mount server with RPi and others compact products.We think this colocation service is a great choice for running specific applications by users and stimulate / improve digital development, a choice where a "powered-up" server is just not necessary.Some of technical featuresCurrently, NanoXion is the only society in France providing a colocation service directly for the consumers. In fact, consumers don't need to send over their own RPi because we propose pre-configured ones in priority.We have worked out an agreement with Telecom partners and we can provide RPi colocation for around €8/mo (illimited traffic, reboot 24x7 through our manager, native IPV6, server delivered pre-installed, complete and ready to use...).As you see, we have several RPi's in a rack. “I can only tell you that we have made an unprecedented number of sketches, cutting / drilling and assembling processes for that !” says Sebastien Fourcade, CEO.We developed our own monitoring tools to be free from proprietary solutions (written in PHP, Shell, WLanguage, etc ...). The whole process to run the implementation of RPi's in our computer racks is provided by our own manager (codename Infinity).Power supplies have been resized to accommodate our racks and we completely redesigned the rack infrastructure to save time and flexibility.Each rack has two sensors : one for temperature and one for humidity. These temperature sensors ensure the proper functioning of the rack and give warning of emerging risks. We also put great care in security control : mac address, ip address, Cisco network equipment ...We are offering our customers a control panel to manage their RPi's : graph bandwidth, power management, root ssh access are available for example.We provide dedicated solutions based on server-oriented Debian / Raspbian distributions and specifically optimized for the occasion.Graph BandwidthAdmin PanelOpening soon…Colocation service is scheduled to be functional at the beginning of January 2014. We mention the "NX-BOX" commercial name to refer to our colocation service and we display our offers under commercial names such as "PiBOX" and others. We already have an internet site to advertise our offers : http://www.nx-box.fr.